What is an accent?
The first time you
hear a voice that sounds
different than your own,
you learn about accent.
Maybe you live in a city
full of people from every
corner of the world, or maybe you
just moved to a neighboring town.
It's hard to pin down,
but it's always there.
Accent includes elements of
pronunciation and articulation,
which have to do with
our bodies and speech.
When producing speech sounds,
we have a number of
instruments at our disposal:
tongues, teeth, nasal cavities, lips.
Beyond pronunciation, accent
captures rhythm, pitch, intonation,
the length of speech segments,
tempo and volume.
Accent is also not the
same as dialect, which refers to
a fully functioning
language variety.
A pattern of speech
can be both a dialect and
an accent within a distinct
regional or social group.
However, an accent does not include
grammar or vocabulary.
It refers only to speech sounds,
which can become a powerful gatekeeper
in a society laced with bias.
Migration has increased sharply
over the last 25 years,
and it is not likely
to slow down anytime soon.
With a surge in cultural
and ethnic diversity,
one might expect a new
norm of acceptance.
But instead of an increase in empathy towards
difference, nationalism and anti-immigrant
attitudes are rampant.
We have to consider how
speech and language play
a pivotal role in our
reconfiguring world.
If a person does not assimilate
perfectly to their new country, they are
seen as a threat to the nation state.
And although there is no
such thing as unaccented speech,
having a non-native accent can
pose problems in all aspects of life.
Just how much can sound affect our
ability to be perceived by others?
After all, aren't people more judgmental
on the basis of physical appearance?
Our listening skills are more
nuanced than you might expect.
A study conducted in 1984
prompted Americans to listen to
progressively shorter clips of English
speech from two unmarked categories:
native English speakers
and native French speakers.
The study revealed
that a listener can detect a non-native
accent in less than 30 seconds,
regardless of familiarity
with the accent in question.
From my home country of
North America to the Netherlands,
we will explore the reality
that what we say often matters
much less than how we say it.
What happens when the speech
we hear is not what we expect?
A voice is much more than just sound.
The United States has the highest
number of immigrants of any country,
and it is estimated that more
than half of the world's population
uses two or more languages daily.
This is especially true of people
living in Europe, where there is a
deep familiarity of multilingualism
in everyday life.
That doesn't mean that
all languages are equal.
Accent, then, becomes an immediate
signifier of whether or not
a person can be judged as
familiar or foreign, leading to snap
judgments on their ethnic origin,
socio-economic class and background.
Unlike other characteristics such
as gender, national origin or race,
accent is not specifically
protected against discrimination
under any current policy.
This provides a loophole
for the gatekeepers
of society to legally reject
a person based on their voice.
Think of landlords, employers,
government workers and judges.
Your accent could prevent you
from finding a place to live
or earning a steady income.
It could even be the tipping point
in a request for asylum.
Although accent-based
discrimination cannot
be untangled from ideas of race, ethnicity
or origin, we need to rethink
the way that we listen to people
who don't sound like us.
Labeling someone as having a "heavy" accent
can be used as a thinly veiled
disguise for xenophobia
in policymaking.
Without a working knowledge of
the key difference between accent
and intelligibility, this form
of discrimination goes unquestioned.
Here in The Hague,
the International City of Peace and
Justice, denying someone a full life
based on their voice, the foundation
of their identity, cannot be permitted.
And humans are not the only imperfect
listeners we have to worry about.
The world is becoming increasingly populated
by digital voices and digital ears.
We have to actively challenge the
imagined neutrality of the machine listener.
After all, social hierarchies are
not erased when algorithms are made,
but our human bias is iterated faster
and on more levels than ever before.